<param ve-config 
       title="Writing to Johnson: Violence in Correspondence, 1763-1764"
       author="Hayley Madl"
       banner="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b0/Visit_of_Chief_Pontiac_and_the_Indians_to_Major_Henry_Gladwin.jpg" 
       layout="vertical">

<param title="Sir William Johnson" eid="Q457369" aliases="Johnson"> 
<param title="Schenectady" eid="Q331380"> 
<param title="French and Indian War" eid="Q154697">
<param title="Pontiac" eid="Q314960">
<param title="Odawa" eid="Q536116">
<param title="Ojibwe" eid="Q255872">
<param title="Shawnee" eid="Q253436">
<param title="Delaware" eid="Q82048">
<param title="Fort Pitt" eid="Q209377">
<param title="Conestoga Town" eid="Q5159536" aliases="Conestoga Indians">
<param title="Philadelphia" eid="Q1345">
<param title="Susquehanna" eid="Q27538">
<param title="Detroit River" eid="Q318435">
<param title="Thomas Gage" eid="Q581935" aliases="Gage">
<param title="Creeks" eid="Q51705">
<param title="Chocktaws" eid="Q324516">
<param title="Albany" eid="Q24861">
<param title="Gregory Evans Dowd" eid="Q109666193" aliases="Dowd">
<param title="Illinois country" eid="Q2554770">
<param title="General Jeffrey Amherst" eid="Q335063" aliases="Amherst">
<param title="Johnson Hall" eid="Q3809760">
<param title="Niagara" eid="Q362553">
<param title="Lords of Trade" eid="Q887543">
<param title="Lancaster" eid="Q320514">
<param title="Paxton Boys" eid="Q3373236">

# Writing to Johnson: Violence in Correspondence, 1763-1764

Born in 1715 in Ireland, Sir William Johnson immigrated to the North American colonies in 1738.[^ref1]  Settling in the Mohawk Valley approximately twenty-five miles west of Schenectady, New York, Johnson rapidly developed his skills and influence first as an Indian trader and later as a diplomat to the various Indigenous nations in the northeast. After the close of the French and Indian War in the colonies, Johnson was made Superintendent of Indian Affairs in the North. In this position, Johnson served as the key mediator between Euroamericans and Indigenous peoples, handling everything from trade and land disputes to holding treaty councils. Consequently, Johnson produced a vast amount of paperwork not only during his time as Superintendent, but even beforehand as a private citizen and a military leader during the war. 
<param ve-image 
       label="Sir William Johnson"
       description="Scanned by the New York Public Library"
       url="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/8a/Wm._%28Sir_William%29_Johnson_%28NYPL_Hades-280214-1253500%29.jpg"
       fit="contain">

This correspondence is largely kept in the collections of the New York State Library, but the most comprehensive print source of such documents is the 14-volume series *The Papers of Sir William Johnson*, published from 1921 to 1965. While Johnson’s correspondence has been vital to the study of Indigenous people in the 18th century, as well as other aspects of the colonial period such as empire in the New World, colonial expansion, and diplomacy, it has never been dedicatedly studied in and of itself. 
<param ve-image
       label="A 14-volume set of *The Papers of Sir William Johnson*"
       url="https://pictures.abebooks.com/inventory/30589771581.jpg"
       fit="contain">
       
The project *Writing to Johnson: Violence in Correspondence, 1763-1764* examines the extent of violence during Pontiac’s War, an Indigenous uprising from 1763 to 1765. Though the French and Indian War ended in the colonies by 1763, the period was not peaceful. Over the course of 1763 and 1764, many Indigenous nations unhappy with France and England after the war such as the Odawa, Ojibwe, Shawnee, and Delaware engaged in the conflict that has become known as Pontiac’s War or Pontiac’s Rebellion. This led to many individual or more intimate instances of violence across the colonies, rather than descriptions of formal warfare. As one of, if not the most unified instance of Indigenous resistance to European rule during the colonial period, Johnson and his Indian agents were key players during this time and discussed its many issues in their correspondence. 

Pontiac’s War has the lingering reputation of being a particularly violent and bloody conflict as a united front of Indigenous nations laid siege to and seized nine out of 14 forts along the frontier.[^ref2] Tales of “Indian savagery” raced across the frontiers and to major communication centers, and many of these tales remained in the public memory as time wore on—regardless of their authenticity. As Superintendent of Indian Affairs, Johnson was a key figure during this conflict and its events passed frequently through his communications. By utilizing Volume IV of *The Papers of Sir William Johnson*, this project reexamines the lethality of Pontiac’s War along the frontier through the eyes (or words, rather) of one of the men involved from the beginning. By using Johnson’s correspondence as its main source, *Writing to Johnson* not only challenges the bloody reputation of Pontiac’s War, but studies Johnson’s communications in and of themselves to evaluate how far his network reached into the backcountry and how reliable correspondence was during the eighteenth century. In this way, *Writing to Johnson* combats narratives of inevitable decline that hinge on Indigenous peoples “validly” losing their lands during periods of violence like Pontiac’s War. As many of these arguments are based on acceptable retaliation to supposed Indigenous brutality, Johnson’s correspondence proves a key source in correct such narratives.

## Defining Violence in Johnson's Correspondence

Eighteenth century documentation, especially stories of the frontier and conflict with Indigenous peoples, is seemingly abound with a variety of different violences. As such, it is important to clearly define “violence” as it applies to Johnson’s correspondence. For the purposes of this project, violence is defined as any physical act against another person, regardless of whether the act resulted in death. Such a broad definition encompasses the different ways violence is discussed in Johnson’s communication. Instances of violence in Johnson’s communication can appear as simply as murders and attacks, but also in much vaguer terms such as “barbarities,” “hostilities,” or “destruction,” among others.[^ref3] As Johnson’s correspondence comes from a variety of merchants, Indian agents, military figures, and civilians spread across North America, he is not only remaining on top of affairs in the colonies, but parsing local terminology and varying levels of literacy throughout. 

Volume IV of The Papers of Sir William Johnson contains his extant documentation from 3 January 1763 to the end of 1765 and stands as the main source for this project. This volume in particular was severely damaged by the 1911 fire in the New York State Capitol, where the original manuscripts were housed. As such, much of the content of Volume IV comes from a printer’s proof of transcripts compiled by New York State Historian Hugh Hastings.[^ref4] Original documents that were completely destroyed in the fire are still noted in Volume IV, but only to the extent that they are described in the Calendar of the Sir William Johnson Manuscripts in the New York State Library compiled by Richard E. Day in 1909. This calendar is the only complete record of all the documents originally housed by the library and includes short descriptions of the content of each document. In some instances, documents were transcribed from other collections. Other documents are also referenced as printed in Volumes II and IV of the Documentary History of the State of New-York and Volumes VI, VII, and VIII of Documents Relative to the Colonial History of the State of New-York, all edited by E. B. O’Callaghan. Despite these drawbacks, Volume IV of The Papers of Sir William Johnson remains an invaluable source of content on a defining moment in colonial America. 

Along with the damaged content of Volume IV, there also remains the unique challenging of determining space and place within this correspondence. As Writing to Johnson is a primarily spatially oriented project, it relies on the locations in which instances of violence took place. As much of this correspondence was characterized as military matters, locations are often included when mentioning instances of violence or points of engagement. However, in an era before GPS, pinpoint locating, especially in spaces considered “frontier,” is often vague or convoluted. Some spaces such as Fort Pitt, Conestoga Town, and Philadelphia are easy to determine, but other spatial descriptions like “Waywamuck on Susquehanna,” “50 Miles from the Fort,” or “near the Detroit River” remain stubbornly unclear.[^ref5] One specific example appears in a letter from David Van Der Heyden to William Johnson in which an unknown Indigenous man was “most cruelly beaten” by Richard Allen and “one McKnight a blacksmith” somewhere on “the road between this place & Kinderhook.”[^ref6] Or another example is in a letter from Thomas Gage to Johnson in which the Creeks “had murdered some Men of [the Chocktaws]” on “the Back of Carolina.”[^ref7] Sometimes these locations are more exact (there are only about twenty miles between Kinderhook and Albany, the origin of the letter), others span the scope of entire colonial frontiers. Though not entirely impossible to map, locations of violence and the ways in which space is discussed within Johnson’s correspondence provide an interesting challenge and level of depth to Writing to Johnson.

## *Writing to Johnson* Project

Though the papers of Sir William Johnson are not in and of themselves innovative in scholarship, their application in a spatial analysis of violence during Pontiac’s War remains unique. Many scholars have studied Johnson and Pontiac’s War before, notably Gregory Evans Dowd in *War Under Heaven: Pontiac, the Indian Nations and the British Empire*, in which he argues that the roots of the conflict were in a lack of British respect for Indigenous sovereignty and personhood in the Great Lakes region and Illinois country, rather than the result of trade or land disputes.[^ref8] However, Johnson’s correspondence itself remains rather untouched. 

The first key step in this project was to compile a dataset of instances of violence within Volume IV. This dataset thus covers Johnson’s correspondence from the beginning of 1763 through the end of 1764—a total of 631 of the nine hundred pages of Volume IV. As mentioned, only instances of physical violence, regardless of whether it resulted in death, are recorded in this dataset. Victims and assailants are recorded by name where given, along with the location and date of the incident and a description pulled from the documentation itself. However, this dataset is not focused solely on the violence. Other variables recorded are the document type (i.e. letter, intelligence report, journal, etc.), the date of the document, recipient, author, the location it was written or sent from, and whether or not this was an incident discussed in previous documentation. As such, this dataset encompasses not only the instances of violence that passed the desk of Sir William Johnson in 1763 and 1764, but who specifically he was corresponding with, when, and where. 
<param ve-tabulator
       url="https://github.com/hayleymadl/SWJ-Project/blob/e3b4462eaf12a701c981a7fd79aea1c052693462/SWJDatasetLOCATION_geocodio_d85d6aa8516e28c4afd47507e95d177bba7ed4c0.csv">

This information was gathered, quite simply, by reading the documentation, beginning in January of 1763. Many common text-search functions fall flat when dealing with eighteenth century manuscripts, especially involving correspondence with those without formal education, as words are often misspelled in a colorful variety of fashions. Other conventions of eighteenth-century language also limit the usefulness of text-search tools, even when searching for basic terms such as “murder,” “attack,” or “kidnapping.” As such, reading and manually recording instances of violence as they appeared in the documentation was the chosen method for this project. As previously stated, the instances recorded involved physical violence. Where documentation is missing but the description hints at violence, instances are recorded according to best judgement of the description and knowledge of the period. Instances of “kidnapping,” especially situations where Indigenous nations are taking captives, are recorded due to their typically violent nature, though a specific violence may not be mentioned verbatim. As previously discussed, the locations of instances of violence are often recorded in inexact and vague terms. As such, the coordinates derived from the location descriptions are as exact as research and common sense can make them. In instances where a clear beginning and end point are given, the coordinate is set at the approximate middle distance between the two based on eighteenth-century pathways of travel. Similarly, where structures or places no longer exist, coordinates are taken based on period maps and research to approximate a location. In instances where a location is either so broad or simply not given, coordinates are not recorded. 

This was a very labor-intensive method of collecting data, though one not unwillingly done. As Johnson corresponded often with many of the same people, one could begin to pick up on individual writing styles and tones. One also became familiar with the ways in which violence was referenced in the written word. As such, it became easier to skim letters and other documents for instances to record, though some were more of a challenge than others. 

Once the dataset was compiled, more decisions arose on how to map it and take advantage of the data’s spatial components. As such, when conceptualizing how to visualize this data, it was imperative to reflect its two distinct spatial aspects. The instances of violence within the dataset could be physically mapped utilizing either the locations of instances of violences, or the locations the letters were sent from. Such a map would be able to show the physical distance of the instances Sir William Johnson heard of and discussed—some happening as far away as the Carolinas—as well as map the movements of Pontiac’s War as they unfolded in Johnson’s correspondence. At the same time, the maps needed to preserve the integrity of how such instances were written about so that the data could also be analyzed from a linguistic perspective. Authors of documentation discussed Indigenous people differently depending on a variety of circumstances and employed a variety of language. This offers valuable insights on the psyches of some of the most powerful men in Indigenous affairs during this period. For example, it is well-known that General Jeffrey Amherst openly despised Indigenous people, but within even his correspondence there exist tiny nuances in the ways he discusses Indigenous people depending specifically on which people he is referencing. Consequently, an argument could be made that Amherst did not despise all Indigenous people equally, and this in turn could provide from context for Amherst’s (largely unpopular) decisions regarding Indigenous affairs. 

<iframe width="100%" height="800px" src="https://mygmu.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=1a13c89a4fee42fba481c92b19979f5f" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"></iframe>

Considering these two spatial elements and their linguistic counterpart, the best way to tie everything together was with a story map. This project relies on Esri’s [Story Maps Classic application](https://storymaps-classic.arcgis.com/en/), as it is familiar and its interface is more intuitive than the ArcGIS Story Maps application. As this project is built on two different maps, *Writing to Johnson* utilizes the Map Series template, which is fairly self-explanatory. With that template, both the locations of violences map and locations of letters map could be displayed in a series, complete with sidebar explanation. With this set-up, users can much more easily flip between maps, as well as explore the individual points on the maps themselves. This way, both the spatial data and integrity of the language in the letters is preserved. The first map, titled *The Violence*, shows the individual points of violence that appeared in the communication of Sir William Johnson from 1763 to 1764. By plotting out the actual instances of violence that were reaching these major communication centers, this map makes the argument that this period was perhaps not as bloody as many believed, or continue to believe. The second map, titled *The Letters*, shows the locations that letters were sent from. This data is not depicted as individual points, but rather as differently sized clusters based on the amount of data originating from a location. As such, this map shows that the vast majority of Sir William Johnson’s correspondence originated from a select few major communication centers in the east: Johnson Hall, his own estate and headquarters; New York City, where Commanders in the North, Generals Amherst and Gage, were headquartered; and Niagara, the key stronghold taken from the French during the French and Indian War. As such, this map, especially when viewed in conjunction with The Violence, makes the argument that events did not happen in isolation, despite the lack of modern instant-communication technology. Men like Sir William Johnson were well-appraised of the events happening in remote locations of the colonies and kept active tabs on a variety of groups and locations throughout. 

Considering that the dataset also included a temporal component, work was done in QGIS to create a timelapse—a sort of Map 1.5 within the series. One of the underlying arguments of this map series is that communication in the eighteenth century was not as slow or limited as common perception may hold. As such, this project takes advantage of this dataset’s use of dates (YYYY-MM-DD) when events first happened, along with the letters’ dates indicating when they appeared in Sir William Johnson’s correspondence. Utilizing shapefiles provided by the U.S. Census Bureau[^ref9] and Statistics Canada[^ref10], instances of violence show on the map in yellow when they first happen, and then turn red when they appear in Johnson’s correspondence. This timelapse was formatted into a GIF (Graphics Interchange Format) file and incorporated as its own page in the Map Series. It stands as a transitional map for users moving from *The Violence* map to *The Letters* map and connects the individual instances of violence themselves to the letters. 

By making Sir William Johnson’s correspondence the foundation of a digital history project, pathways of analysis are created that were not previously accessible. As more of Johnson’s correspondence is compiled into the database, we receive a more complete picture of his reach across the colonies and the true depths of his involvement in Indigenous and Euroamerican affairs. In addition to analyzing Johnson’s correspondence in an academic manner, *Writing to Johnson* strives to help restore the autonomy and sovereignty of Indigenous people in North America, too often erased from local histories. Making this material available online invites local communities and activists to conduct their own research and engage with a history of violence that seems temporally remote, but still has lasting effects on various communities, especially Indigenous communities, in the modern day. 

## Volume IV in Use

The language and content of the documents in Johnson’s correspondence varies greatly depending on the author and recipient. As such, instances and violence are discussed in different ways. However, despite the language used in relaying violent events, the sheer lack of quantity undermines the prevailing stories of the war’s prevalent brutality. Many of the instances of violence recorded in the dataset involve skirmishes between parties of Indigenous warriors and small contingents of soldiers, though words like “murder” and “massacre” abound in these soldiers’ and officials’ descriptions of events. For example, Sir William Johnson writes to the Lords of Trade in England on 1 July 1763, appraising them of the situation on the frontiers within the first few months of Pontiac’s War. Johnson’s language paints the situation as devastating and dire—a story of Indigenous people stirred up by French meddling (“the Govr. Of New Orleans”). His main goal is to incite sympathy and action; Johnson needs the Lords of Trade to furnish more funds to raise troops against this “Indian insurrection.” As such, his characterization of events is designed to inspire that. 

The language of violence in this correspondence also takes on the characterization of the “enemy.” After realizing that they would be more successful in utilizing other Indigenous nations to fight back against Pontiac, Johnson sent out teams of allied-Indigenous to attack those allied with Pontiac, such as the Delawares. As such, one see’s the events relayed on a clear binary of good and evil. Phrases like “our Enemies” and “Murdering Notorious Villains” litter correspondence such as this, and it is these phrases that have remained in the collective memory of Pontiac’s War—but only in reference to Pontiac and his supporters. As such, the language within Johnson’s correspondence has served to help cement the image of this period as bloody and violent within the psyches not only of those involved at the time, but with the passed down memory of Pontiac’s War to this day. 

However, the above examples do not characterize all of Johnson’s correspondence. One of the goals of this project is to illuminate those instances that do not paint all Indigenous peoples as conspirators, and to demonstrate that violence during this conflict was also perpetrated by Euroamericans. For example, one of the first instances of violence recorded in this dataset involve two Euroamerican men attacking an Indigenous man outside of Albany, New York. This instance occurred early in 1763 and exemplifies the rising tensions many people were feeling toward Indigenous people, even in “civilized” spaces like Albany, New York. But we see that David Van Der Heyden relays the situation without the same Euroamerican-prejudice as the previous highlighted examples, and discusses the reparations paid to the Indigenous man.  

Similarly, there is the now-infamous massacre of the Conestoga Indians. The Conestoga lived in a town in Pennsylvania not far from Lancaster. As allied Indigenous people, they took no part in Pontiac’s War, but in 1763 a vigilante group no known as the Paxton Boys killed multiple residents of the town in response to the War. Such instances negate the all-encompassing narrative of “Indian savagery” that Pontiac’s War had previously been bathed in and shows, in a word, the savagery of Euroamericans against Indigenous peoples.  

## Project Findings

The frontier is often perceived as a violent and lawless place during the eighteenth century. However, if this were true, Johnson’s correspondence would be littered with mentions of murders, massacres, and other harm. Rather, within approximately four hundred pieces of documentation, there are only just above one hundred instances of violence—some of which are single instances mentioned multiple times across multiple letters. Oftentimes, these individual instances of violence are spaced out over the course of several weeks. At the peak of the war during the summers of 1763 and 1764, acts of violence happened roughly every two weeks. However, during the rest of the years the frequency would drop significantly. This speaks to not only the lack of prevalence of instances of violence, but to the speed of communication during the eighteenth century. Johnson was receiving word of events at most two weeks after they had initially happened—much sooner than common perceptions may hold. 

Of course, not every instance of violence during this period could possibly reach Sir William Johnson. However, Johnson was a deeply connected man with a vast network of both Indigenous and European agents as far into the backcountry as Illinois. Moreover, Johnson was deeply, personally involved in many Indigenous affairs. Indigenous people often appealed to him directly with their issues for him to address. And when Johnson did receive word of violent events, the *language* used in such correspondence had its own underlying agenda. As the specific examples in this essay have shown, the language of violence in Johnson’s correspondence can serve to bring in funds and stir up sentiment against a perceived enemy or in sympathy of an ally. As such, Johnson and his agents communicated Indigenous affairs with specific goals in mind, stated or otherwise. 

Most telling, however, is the sheer volume of content in Johnson’s correspondence that does not reference violence whatsoever. For every piece of correspondence that deals with violence, there are three or more that involve bills, land encroachments, appeals of deeds, or updates on health and families. In fact, the vast majority of disputes that appear in Johnson’s correspondence for this period are legal in nature rather than violent. This could be due to the recent close of the French and Indian War—Indigenous and European adversaries were physically and financially exhausted and may not have been able to conduct violence on the level they would have preferred. However, it could also more likely be a testament to Johnson’s skill as a diplomat and as a mediator between Indigenous nations and the Crown and its colonies. 

# References
[^ref1]: “Sir William Johnson, 1715-1774, Papers, 1738-1808,” New York State Library, accessed 31 March 2022, https://www.nysl.nysed.gov/msscfa/sc7005.htm. 
[^ref2]: Thomas Guthrie Marquis, *The War Chief of the Ottawas: A Chronicle of the Pontiac War* (Luton, England: Andrews UK Limited, 2012), 32. 
[^ref3]: Alexander C. Flick, ed., *The Papers of Sir William Johnson*, Vol. IV (Albany, NY: The University of the State of New York, 1925), 148, 190, 219. 
[^ref4]: “Sir William Johnson, 1715-1774, Papers, 1738-1808.”
[^ref5]: Flick, *The Papers of Sir William Johnson*, 498, 550, 135.
[^ref6]: Ibid., 43-44.
[^ref7]: Ibid., 315.
[^ref8]: Gregory Evans Dowd, *War Under Heaven: Pontiac, the Indian Nations and the British Empire* (Batltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002), 3. 
[^ref9]: “Cartographic Boundary Files – Shapefile, 2018,” United States Census Bureau, https://www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/carto-boundary-file.html.
[^ref10]: “2021 Census – Boundary files,” Statistics Canada, https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/2021/geo/sip-pis/boundary-limites/index2021-eng.cfm?year=21. 
